---
title: "Introduction"
style: chapter page-1
---

{% include metadata %}

# Introduction

## When Is Cooperation Rational?

Systemic problems are the result of actions by many people. They are either the excess of some action (like emitting CO<sub>2</sub> or fishing in the ocean) or the lack of some action (like contributing to the common stock through paying tax); accordingly they require collective action to be addressed. The nature of these problems is also such that ultimately everyone would profit from cooperation, and everyone would suffer as the result of a failure to cooperate, while the benefit and cost to each individual will differ according to their degree of long-term independence with regards to the resource in question. It seems like the reasonable thing to do, if the degree of interdependence is relatively high, would be to cooperate and collectively address problems that affect the collective of individuals, and thereby make everyone better off; but this is exactly the opposite of what economic theorists have predicted people will do.

When we adopt a Theory of Rational Choice that assumes individuals make their decisions in isolation, define their preferences in isolation, and seek always to maximize their self-interest (which is usually restricted to financial outcomes), we are bound to face a number of problems which have no technical solution, where “technical solution” is defined as a solution brought about by a change in techniques and not requiring a change in human values or ideas of morality.[^1] In fact, for collective problems to be addressed, the neo-classical economist can *only* look to technical solutions, or if not available, property rights and sanctions that restrict freedom, in order to prevent mutual ruin in the commons by eliminating the commons altogether. They can never rely on a rational actor’s normative reasons for action which enable appropriate assessment and response to a situation, since morality and social norms have space in the Rational Choice theory only as preferences, and preferences are given, exogenous to the situation individuals find themselves in.

Herein I will challenge the basic assumptions of Rational Choice theory, presenting a picture of human beings who are socially responsive to more than selfish considerations of utility maximization, who value many different things in different ways which cannot be reduced to considerations of utility, and assess their reasons for action and respond appropriately, when they are acting rationally. This will open up a space for investigating the conditions under which rational individuals will act as selfish utility maximizers, and the conditions under which they will actually do their fair share. With new possibilities for rational actors to cooperate some theoretical and practical problems will seem less of a lost cause, but the task of changing social relations to adequately meet the standards of a cooperative endeavour will pose problems for basing relations on market norms and coercive governance.

[^1]: Garret Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons”, Published in *Science*, 142 (1968) December 13. 1243

