---
title: "2. Goodbye World"
---

# 2. A Paradox of Rational Choice as Utility Maximization

Two individuals each have the option to cooperate or defect (C or D). The payoff structure for the game can be seen in figure 1, where V &gt; X &gt; Y &gt; Z; and 2X &gt; V + Z. When the other player cooperates, the payoff for defection is the best, when the other player defects, the payoff for defection is best, so if one is maximizing one’s own payoff (the assumed point of the game) no matter what the other does, you should always defect. The result is that with both player’s thinking this way, they both defect, and they each a much lower payoff that if they had both cooperated (Y &lt; X).

*Figure 1: A Prisoner’s Dilemma Game*

| Player 1   | Player 2 |
|------------|----------|------|------|
|            |          | C    | D    |
|            | C        | X, X | Z, V |
|            | D        | V, Z | Y, Y |

An example of this paradox pertains to a class of goods often called “common pool resources”, its formal scheme is an iterated n-person generalisation of a prisoner’s dilemma game. While first mentioned by Lloyd, it was only spelled out in full by Hardin in 1968. Hardin called it “The Tragedy of the Commons”, his thought experiment aimed to show that “freedom in a commons brings ruin to all”. Hardin starts by assuring us that “as a rational being each herdsman will seek to maximize his gain”, and asks himself, “What is the utility to *me* of adding one more animal to my herd?” (Hardin’s emphasis)[^6]. The herdsman concludes that it will give him more utility to add another animal than to refrain, and another, and another… Hardin says, “Each man is locked into a system which compels him to increase his herd without limit, in a world that is limited”.[^7] This leads to the degradation of the commons, all the individual herdsmen thinking rationally has the net outcome that the commons is destroyed. This is a sure paradox if there ever was one, the rational action for every individual leads to “mutual ruin”. Rational action, whose supposed point is utility maximization (which surely includes livelihood), serves to undermine the livelihood of the individual when he finds himself acting in a situation of scarcity with other rational people.

But how accurate is this depiction of a context of common property? And moreover, how accurate is this depiction of rational actors? Firstly, Hardin admitted more than 25 years later that the title of his paper was misleading, and that it should have been called “The Tragedy of the *Unmanaged* Commons” (my emphasis).[^8] This is a more accurate title because it insinuates that management can help avoid tragedy. But more importantly, the tragedy is not a tragedy of common ownership (which would usually have some social institutions in place to manage exploitation, coordinate actions and avoid tragedy if there were known conditions of scarcity), but rather, a tragedy of a “free for all”, where no rules apply and individuals have no regard for communal interests, which include the survival of the community for future generations.

The picture of rational actors as isolated individuals maximizing short-term self-interest makes sense in certain conditions. In the absence of social arrangements to ensure others won’t exploit the resource while the individual or community refrains from exploiting it, individuals might exploit to secure their livelihood. In the absence of social support to ensure the individual won’t suffer while others prosper it is rational to increase your herd, one has no good reason to offer oneself up for self-sacrifice, if you can’t be assured that the resource will be here next year, or that you will be here next year, you might as well maximize your production now to save and secure your livelihood for later.

Game theory, based on the rational choice model, holds that commitments never work as norms for action, only as beliefs about what others will do, which helps you to coordinate to find an equilibrium (a stable strategy where no one could be made better off without making someone worse off). In general, commitments mean quite little in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game if the players are relatively short-sighted and self-interested; if the other player assured me they would cooperate or defect, I would still have an interest in defecting always. However, for example in an iterated n-person generalisation of a Prisoner’s Dilemma game, if you knew that when you defected in this round of a game, the community would defect against you in the next round of the game (a strategy called Tit-for-Tat), then you would be better off cooperating if you expect to be around for many more rounds (and do not discount future payoffs too highly). If you started cooperating to maximize your utility, and thereby playing according to a strategy of reciprocity (Tit-for-Tat), the population would converge to equilibrium where everyone is playing according to reciprocity, and no person can get a better payoff by changing only their own strategy. But this would not be a case of you conforming to a norm of cooperation because it is the right thing to do, it would be a case where the utility from cooperation outweighs the utility from defection when the others are playing Tit-for-Tat. Your belief about what the going “norm” is guides your action to maximize your utility, thereby converging to an equilibrium with others. But there are many equilibria in a Prisoner’s Dilemma, one such equilibrium is where all players are defecting all the time, so we cannot count on norms which essentially lack normativity to ensure cooperation unless a large enough proportion of the population already endorses those norms.[^9] As Hardin says, there appear to be no sure technical solutions which would involve nothing in the way of morality or values.[^10]

Hardin discounts any possible solution in the form of human values or morality, by stating that even if it was possible to convince people to do the right thing, guilt is a pathology: when we ask people to take “responsibility” we are essentially appealing to their conscience, and to try and “browbeat” a free man to do something against his interests is to try get something for nothing.[^11] Hardin says there is only one way to make people take real responsibility for the circumstance, create social arrangements. He doesn’t mean anything like the intuitive understandings of “social arrangements”, with implicit social contracts, platforms for discussion to establish mutual understandings of problems and norms for behaviour, or “taking responsibility”, involving self-determination. Rather he means, and says explicitly, that government imposed coercion or privatizing the property is the only way to “free” individuals from mutual ruin.[^12] But monitoring compliance is difficult, and if people are treated as self-interested, natural compliance levels will be low, so presumably an extensive and absolute authority will need to monitor everything and impose strong sanctions on undesired behaviour. Nothing is said of how exactly those institutions will be monitored to comply with their duties in providing the public good of monitoring, perhaps it is assumed that individuals in institutions are more trustworthy and dedicated than citizens, or assumed that a regress of monitoring the monitors on all levels can work (a common goods dilemma with no technical solution that Hardin neglects).

But human beings are capable of drawing on reasons for action which are essentially normative, not self-interested, and can be motivating forces for action, such as “I ought to do my part in a cooperative endeavour”, or “I should not exploit other people’s goodwill”. These norms can bypass, shape or silence one’s desires when the context is seen as appropriate. Norms or appeals need not be sickness inducing appeals to conscience, but in some cases they will rightly make individuals evaluate themselves against their ideals, and in no way does this appeal to integrity and conscience embody any “pathology” or inherent weakness of human beings, living up to our own norms and ideals is rational and necessary to living a good life as social beings with the need for coherent narratives. Shame, a self-evaluative emotion (which Hardin reduces to guilt), is a powerful tool for self-reflection and improvement of action. I will leave that thought with you until § 4.

[^6]: Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons”, 1245

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Garret Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Unmanaged Commons” Chap 7 in Dustin J. Pen, Iver Mysterud eds., *Evolutionary Perspectives of Environmental Problems*, (London: Transaction Publishers, 2007)

[^9]: Robert Axelrod, *The Evolution of Co-operation,* (New York: Penguin, 1990) 217-219

[^10]: Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons”, 1243

[^11]: Ibid. 1247

[^12]: Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons”, 1246



