---
title: "Problems as the Absence of Markets"
style: "chapter"
---

{% include metadata %}

# 3. Problems as the Absence of Markets

When a tragedy of the free-for-all arises, it is, according to neo-classical economic theory, for one reason only: no market exists for the land, being free of charge massively undervalues the land, whose price should rather be set by equalizing the supply of land with demand. This is an example of so-called market failure: the market has failed to match supply with demand because an externality exists, i.e. there is a cost imposed on a third party rather than internalised by the parties who the cost originates with. Assuming the parties are purely self-interested, the only way to internalise the cost is to be charged for it. In this way market failure is an indication of the incompleteness of markets, not an indication of any real defect with them or the values of the actors within them. One way to extend the market would be to establish property rights and sell the rights to the highest bidder (whoever values it most in monetary terms), and then whoever acquires the property can determine a value for the good by setting a price (a willingness to accept), and people who are willing and able to pay (who value the good at least as much as the seller’s willingness to accept) will pay and use the resource. In this way, so they say, those who value the good the most (expressed as willingness and ability to pay) receive access to it. Both parties are better off after the exchange, which is inferred by the fact that they engaged in a voluntary exchange to acquire a good that they preferred to their original endowment. But nothing is said of those who are excluded, they presumably don’t value the good enough to pursue it, when we take value as indicated by willingness (and ability) to pay.

Another way to put an “appropriate value” on a good to eliminate the free-for-all tragedy is for the government to determine an appropriate value for the good (which they do by cost-benefit analysis, assessing the value of production or services that the good supports and how much people will pay for them) and effectively charge a price for exploitation in the form of taxes or fines. Given the increased cost of exploitation, users will exploit less; this is the price effect on demand that will match it with supply. Matching demand with supply, in either case, is meant to introduce a market to ensure efficiency. The method for enticing self-interested and isolated individuals to conform to better practices can simply be called “incentivizing” (a relatively recent word in economics, first used in 1968)[^13] and is equivalent to the term “coercion” that Hardin and his predecessors used in this context. Behind both of these solutions, and the theory of market failure, is the First Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics.

The First Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics says that when a perfectly competitive market economy is in equilibrium it is allocatively efficient, i.e. Pareto Optimal. Pareto Optimality refers to a state where no one person can be made better off without making someone else worse off, so equilibrium should be indicated by no more voluntary exchanges taking place, as all opportunities for mutual gain have been exhausted.[^14] In this way goods have found their way into the hands of those who are said to value them most, and it is efficient. But a number of conditions must be in place if the theorem is to hold; there must be perfect rationality of agents and perfect information, property rights must be well-defined and costlessly enforced, transaction costs must be zero such that trade can happen easily anywhere, there must be no externalities on third parties, and importantly, all commodities must be infinitely divisible and substitutable for each other.[^15] But efficiency does not actually guarantee properly valuing things or people, or ensuring justice or conservation. Slavery could be Pareto Optimal, you couldn’t make the slaves better off without making the slave-owners worse off, and no voluntary exchange would take place if the slaves were not “willing” to pay the price for their freedom. Similarly, if people are not willing to pay to clean up an oil spill, the oil spill could still be considered “efficient”, because the value of cleaning it up is not discernible in their consumer choice; what counts as an externality are only those costs that are discernible from a third party’s elicited preferences in choices of consumption.

Arrow and Debreu formalised this general equilibrium with a complete market, a market for every good, including not just present goods and consumers but future ones too.[^16] Economists insist their theories are value-neutral (even though the whole purpose of the theorem at hand is to maximize “social welfare”, seen as maximizing individuals given preferences through ensuring efficiency); they leave all questions of ends up to consumers themselves, ensuring efficiency through allocations which are represented in utility rather than any specific goods, since all goods are substitutable. This provides the means for the aggregation and maximization of preference satisfaction. But clearly there are no needs such as water or air in neo-classical economic theory; there is nothing specific that we must leave to individuals of the future except bundles of goods or money to be exchanged for goods they might prefer. Efficiency doesn’t imply conservation or meeting needs (which are distinct from strong preferences signalled by willingness to pay), thus there is a case for regulation of the distribution and occurrence of certain goods, because achieving maximum “social welfare” by allowing the satisfaction of preferences through voluntary exchange does not ensure justice or even the survival of consumers. There are some things that we value that cannot be expressed in our preferences for goods and willingness to pay for them. Even if the market is complete and frictionless etc. it can surely still said to have “failed” if it fails to meet needs and achieve a true or even minimally adequate social welfare.[^17]

In practice the conditions look like utopian assumptions anyway. Complete and competitive markets in a frictionless economy are unrealistic assumptions, and the rarity of identifying a Pareto Optimal equilibrium (or a Superior allocation which moves towards it) leads policy prescribers to use a different principle for allocative efficiency, the Kaldor-Hicks principle. This principle advocates a move to a point where someone is better off, and another party may be worse off, but the gains to the first party are so great that they could hypothetically compensate the party who is made worse off and still have extra gain.[^18] Compensation for the loss is not enforced, and in principle the theorem is perfectly compatible with extreme misery being compounded while extreme wealth grows. This is the practical outcome of their quest for welfare through efficiency. Questions of justice (distribution) and conservation (occurrence) aside, the condition which is most worrying for my purposes here relates to the divisibility and substitutability of any good with any other good (the character of how we value goods), which requires that everything of value is commodified such that a market exists for it, and that for any agent who prefers a bundle of 3x and 1y to one with 3y and 1x, there exists some extra amount of y that she could be given that would reverse her preference for the bundles. It requires that people value things as exchangeable with any other thing, and that everything of value be commodified. I will return to this criticism in the next section (§ 4), after engaging with some more examples of addressing market failure, which will illuminate the points I aim to make further on.

Markets can also be established to ensure the provision of a pubic good, which while sharing the formal structure of a social dilemma with common pool (free-for-all) resources, relates to *provision* of non-excludable resources rather than *restraint*. Everyone is better off if everyone contributes to the public good, but each individual is assumed to have the short-term self-interest that makes “Don’t Contribute” a dominant strategy, with the result that the good is underprovided and everyone is worse off. One could ensure adequate contribution by enforcing it, monitoring contribution and fining those who don’t contribute. Another standard economic method is to actually pay people to contribute, for example paying people to give blood or to have a toxic waste site in their community. All these methods work by changing the payoffs of actors, making contribution or restraint the more beneficial course of action. But often the implementations of such schemes lead to outcomes that confound standard theory. When a payment to people or sanction on them to “do the right thing” leads to less of the right action, it completely violates the price effect, adding more financial benefit to choosing the socially desirable option leads to less supply of that action.

Finding a place to store nuclear waste is no easy task. In Switzerland parliament designated the small village Wolfenschiessen as a potential candidate for storing the country’s waste. Before a referendum was held, they surveyed the villagers and asked if they would vote to accept the siting in the village if it was found to be the safest potential site. 51% of the villagers said yes; despite the undesirable risks and costs that it would impose on them, their civic duty appeared to weigh in on their decision: their country depended on Nuclear energy whose waste needed to be stored somewhere.[^19] Hoping to increase acceptance, the villagers were questioned again and were offered an annual payment for the siting of the waste depository in their village. The financial incentive had the effect that acceptance decreased from 51% to 25%. When the incentive was increased, even to $8,700 per annum per person, acceptance did not go up. 83% of the rejecters of the offer explained their stance by saying they could not be bribed.[^20] Frey and Oberholzer-Gee who compiled the study stated that “incentives tend to crowd out civic duty”, transforming a matter of civic duty, where what matters is that the village is providing a socially desirable (albeit locally undesirable) good, to a matter of personal fiscal benefit and personal risk.[^21] The monetary incentive made people feel like they were being bribed, exploited, and unsure of whether they were part of a civic, cooperative endeavour. Citizens tend to resent their public duties or acts in the name of public spirit being treated as if they are matters of cost-benefit analysis (and compensable with money). The result of numerous studies is that Public Goods (such as libraries and better schools), like returning gifts in kind, are preferred to monetary compensation, because they acknowledge public spirit and sacrifice, rather than degrading the value of what the citizens have done, as if they simply participated in a business deal.[^22]

Another example of the apparent crowding out of moral or civic motivations is a case of experiments in day-care centres in Israel. There were some unwanted late pickups of children and to ameliorate this a fine was enforced. The result was that late-pickups nearly doubled, the explanations given by analysts of the situation state that the parents’ treatment of the decision of whether to be late or on time became a fiscal one (and they were willing to pay for being late) rather than a moral one with concern for the care-givers.[^23] The same scholars conducted an experiment incentivizing groups of high-school students doing door-to-door collections of donations for good causes. Three groups were each given a motivational speech, but then offered differing financial incentives. The first group, offered no incentive, collected 50% more than a second group given a 1% commission, and 9% more than a third group given a 10% commission.[^24] The authors’ conclusion is that incentives only work better than no-pay for good deeds when they are sufficiently high.[^25] That statement is close to tautological, stating that incentives work when they adequately incentivize; but moreover, the case shows that financial incentives are not additive with moral or intrinsic incentives; they were all given a motivational speech.

A last example forms a comparison between blood donation systems in the UK and the US, where in the former blood is provided by donations, while in the US people are paid for their donations or are allowed to refuse the money if they like. In his book *The Gift Relationship*, Richard Titmuss presented this case and argued that on “efficiency” terms alone, the donation system worked better: the US system had more chronic shortages and wasted blood, higher costs, and a higher risk of contaminated blood. He also added that it was exploitative of the poor, stating that it was a sort of redistribution of blood from the poor to the rich.[^26] The main conclusion of his book, however, was that commodifying blood undermines a Gift-Relation, and that commodification of the US system had led to a decrease in donations. He worried about the decline of altruistic motives, the “theme of the gift”, when giving blood became a predominantly market transaction rather than an altruistic act that was an active feature of social life. He anticipated that such a decline in altruism would spread to other spheres of social life.[^27]

In all four cases a provision or fulfilment of a perceived duty was at stake. Let us call doing the socially desirable thing X and doing the socially undesirable thing Z. In each case, some amount of people preferred X to Z, and some preferred Z to X. What we would expect is that if we made X more beneficial for the individuals, more of them would “prefer” it, i.e. choose to do it. The benefits to those who already chose X over Z were supposed to simply be greater than before, so their preference orderings would stay the same, and the number of people who chose X (chose to accept the site, arrived on time, collected lots of donations, and donated blood) would increase. Undoubtedly those who were interested in the extra benefit, like the extremely poor people donating their blood for income, would have increased their provisions (chose X) because it was more financially beneficial to do so. But let us analyse those who *already* chose X in the first place, their initial preference was for X > Z, an incentive was added such that X + benefit > X, and somehow their choice reflected that Z > X + benefit; their provisions decreased relative to the stage where no incentive was present. These are intransitive preferences (X>Z; X+benefit>X; Z>X+benefit), violating the Rational Choice axioms. Joseph Raz takes this sort of intransitivity as a sign of incommensurability, a sign of things being valued in different ways, which will be picked apart in the next section (§ 4).[^28] Suffice it to say here that if there were benefits from doing the socially desirable action to begin with, they were not additive with financial incentives for the individuals making a choice. Their moral and intrinsic motivations were crowded out by the introduction of incentives that provided a cue for the context to be governed by market reasoning and norms. The value of the action for the actor was changed from a personally, publicly, morally, or intrinsically valuable action, and evaluated in those ways, to one that was evaluated by a market analysis (and was not sufficiently financially valuable to induce the socially desirable action).

[^13]: Michael Sandel, *What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets*, (Parktown North: Penguin, 2012) 87

[^14]: Debra Satz, *Why Some Things Should Not Be For Sale: The Moral Limits of Markets*, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010) 18

[^15]: David M. Kreps, *A Course in Microeconomic Theory* (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1990)

[^16]: Satz, op.cit. 33

[^17]: Ibid. 112

[^18]: Michael Taylor, *Rationality and the Ideology of Disconnection*, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006) 64

[^19]: Sandel, op.cit. 115

[^20]: Ibid. 116

[^21]: Bruno S. Frey & Felix Oberholzer-Gee, “The Cost of Price Incentives: An Empirical Analysis of Motivation Crowding-Out”, in *American Economic Review* 87, no. 4 (September 1997): 753

[^22]: Carol Mansfield, George Houtven & Joel Huber, “Compensating for Public Harms: Why Public Goods are Preferred to Money,” in *Land Economics* 78, no. 3 (August 2002): 368-89

[^23]: Sandel op.cit. 119; Taylor op.cit 160; Uri Gneezy & Aldo Rusticini, “A Fine is a Price”, in *Journal of Legal Studies* 29, no. 1 (January 2000) 1-17

[^24]: Sandel op. cit. 118; Uri Gneezy & Aldo Rusticini, “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All”, in *Quarterly Journal of Economics* (August 2000) 798-99

[^25]: Gneezy & Rusticini, loc.cit. 799-803

[^26]: Richard Titmuss, *The Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to Social Policy,* (New York: Pantheon, 1971) 277

[^27]: Ibid. 224

[^28]: Joseph Raz, *Practical Reason and Norms,* (London: Hutchinson, 1975) sec. 1.2

