---
title: "Reasons, Motivation and Value"
style: chapter
---

{% include metadata %}

# 4. Reasons, Motivation and Value

The empirical cases wherein people responded in a manner contradicting the expectations of Rational Choice theory can only be understood if one accepts that they were not trying to maximize value in the monistic sense, as equivalent to financial benefit. If we assume that they received some benefit from their acts of giving, and that value is summative on a single scale, then adding an economic incentive to the existing benefits should have been additive. Instead, the added economic benefit yielded less of the activity; their motivations and reasons for action were undermined, not reinforced, by economic benefits. Some people will be adequately incentivized to do something because of a financial reward or a sanction that amounts to a cost, but then the motivating force for doing the action because it is right, or valuable in itself, is unlikely to play any part. Rather, the reason for action will be a desire for personal benefit. The context of provision changes from a relational model of communal giving and equal participation (doing one’s part) to a purely economic relation, wherein the only question becomes “does it pay to do this?” With non-additive values we have reason to doubt a monistic value scale such as utility. We have reason to believe that people value things in different ways, and sometimes in ways that are not commensurable with money.

Before we get to commensurability, the first assumption in the second sentence of this section also deserves questioning. Did they receive some benefit from performing a civic duty or conforming to a moral norm? Perhaps they did, perhaps the actions made them feel good as a by-product, providing some benefit to self-esteem. Many theorists have tried to accommodate a preference for contributing to other’s well-being, or a preference for conforming to a norm in their analysis of rational decision-making. Confronting the results of Titmuss’ *Gift Relationship*, Arrow suggested that an individual preference to contribute to the well-being of others should be included in the utility function of some individuals.[^29] Such accommodations play havoc with the constrained individual benefits that are required to maximize social welfare, illustrated by an example given by Elster: two boys find a chocolate cake, the first boy says “I want all of it”, the second boy says “we should share”, an adult comes along and says “Gentlemen, compromise! Three quarters for you, and one quarter for you”.[^30] This division cannot be said to really maximize welfare, even though it was a compromise between their two elicited preferences, and I am inclined to say that the second boy’s self-interest surely included as much cake as possible, and a belief that they should share or compromise moderated his selfish interests and motivated his proposal. Moreover, it is plainly misleading and desperate to conjure up such a preference post hoc to fit the Rational Choice model to cases of actual rational choice; it does nothing in the way of explaining how people are motivated, and why in some contexts their “desire” to help others would be absent or undermined, it simply assumes that such a desire must exist because preferences, desires, and self-interests are inferred from choices.

With the second boy, and with those who wanted to perform civic duties, was an expected by-product of preference satisfaction (where their preference is standardly read off their elicited choices) their *reason* for action? Do people perform civic duties, house toxic waste sites and share cake because it gives them satisfaction? If we say yes, we are bound to abandon all notions of altruism or morality, properly conceived as motivated by other-regarding, not selfish, considerations. Rational Choice theory can only understand rational actions in terms of a calculated weighing up and trading off of preferences to determine which action would maximize personal utility, and as such any motivation to do something can be found in a preference constituting the desire for the satisfaction of that will. Desires, represented by preferences, are the motivating force for any rational action. No norm, social or moral, has motivating force unless it is represented by preferences in the utility function.

Taylor calls this strand of thought a Neo-Humean conception of motivation[^31], presumably relating back to Hume’s statement “Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions”.[^32] But Taylor contends that beliefs can have more power than the Rational Choice theorist gives them credit for.[^33] Beliefs, especially those that constitute norms for action, which say what one should or must do in a circumstance, can motivate action directly, and cannot be included as mere preferences. For example, a person at a party may moderate the motivational force of her preference for more cake because she knows that someone else wants it. She may still have an unsatisfied preference for the cake, and crave it, but her desire is weakened in motivational force by a belief that she should let someone else have it. Similarly, if a man desires to cheat on his wife, he might discount this desire by the belief that it would be wrong to do so. His desire might be strong all the same, and he may not feel satisfied at all, but he recognizes that the desire is not a good reason for action.[^34] In these cases it would be misleading to say that if they had chosen cake and cheating respectively, it would prove that their desire for that option would have been stronger or the desire for restraint would have been weaker than in the first case of restraint. It might go to show that the actors in the cases of restraint have beliefs about what is right and about what considerations count in the context that motivated them differently to a cost-benefit analysis of the actions that would most satisfy their desires.

If we insist that as a rational action restraint must be understood as based on a desire for such a course of action, then the desires themselves still seem to be motivated, and are not just given tastes.[^35] They are motivated by beliefs, by the belief that having the last piece of cake would be wrong, or the belief that cheating would be wrong. The desire seems to be motivated by a belief or standing concern, and especially influenced by the situation at hand. If one felt like it was a competitive scenario to get the last piece of cake, or that the other person who wanted the last piece had already had two pieces, such that you didn’t see restraint as the fair choice, the desire to give the other the last piece of cake would not arise because a motivational concern, a reason for restraint, would be lacking. The usual preference for more cake rather than less would dominate the action. Beliefs and concerns can motivate action and be called upon in appropriate situations, but beliefs and concerns themselves can be shaped and informed by reason, reason is not only a slave of given exogenous passions. The social and moral norms, which are essentially normative for action and inform, shape, or silence our desires, can also be changed and influenced by reason, a point I will expand on in the next section (§ 5).

Different norms apply to different contexts; a context of civic life with rights and duties differs greatly from a market transaction. A market transaction treats people as consumers, who are selfish and have no duties to anyone else, not citizens, embedded in a community and capable of doing their part voluntarily (without coercion or bribery). People have no reason to comply if they would rather be treated as citizens, they feel like they are being “bought off” (bribed), and have no assurance that they are part of a civic cooperative endeavour and won’t be exploited. In such a context a motivational concern to do one’s part for the public becomes irrelevant, because there is no such standing concern in purely economic relations. The two negotiating sides seem to be working in different relational models, with different concerns and values, until the market model becomes dominant. The way people value goods and conceive of evaluation in a circumstance can actually be changed by commodifying a good.

Arrow commented on Titmuss’ results, responding to his claim about the change of values by a change in relations. Failing to understand the significance of reasons for action, and how courses of action can be changed in significance to the actor by commodifying them, he stated, “If to a voluntary blood donor system we add the possibility of selling blood, we have only expanded the individual’s range of alternatives. If he derives satisfaction from giving… he can still give, and nothing has been done to impair that right”, “why should it be that the creation of a market for blood would decrease the altruism embodied in giving blood?”[^36] He refused to accept that commodifying a good could change the context to one dominated by market norms, could change the significance of the context and the good for the actor. Then he recommended the inclusion of a preference for helping others to be added to the utility function.[^37] This would only do the requisite explanatory job for Titmuss’ results if he included a clause stating that the preference for helping others was incompatible, and therefore non-additive, with an economic incentive, (i.e. to say that people’s “altruistic” motives were displaced because the benefit of giving was constitutively incompatible with the good being a commodity). The hypothetical clause would go some way to admitting incommensurability: that different motivational concerns of the agent didn’t add up or trade off on a single scale.

The concept of commensurability in this context depicts that for a rational agent with a valuational outlook, there always exists an account of how different concerns trade-off for them.[^38] An agent can say how the two goods or different concerns that they embody are ranked as more, less, or equal in value up against a common measure. (For example, you must be able to measure the values of serving yourself, other people, and the environment against one another, and say which one maximizes your utility, and adjust your action accordingly). This amounts to an agent being able to reduce valuational concerns to a single scale of value (that is generally applicable to all contexts) and measure and weigh all values up against each other by that measure. Practical choice is depicted as reducing concerns to a single measure of utility (and commensurable with money), and maximizing that measure. Incommensurability amounts to the opposite of this, and a mark of it is the kind of intransitivity we encountered in § 3.

Incommensurability of goods or concerns says that there does *not* exist one scale of value on which all values and concerns are measured and which informs practical deliberation in all cases; agents value things in different ways and make their decisions by deciding which concerns matter under the circumstances, often there is no weighing up at all of concerns that would matter elsewhere but seem irrelevant under the circumstances. There is no determinable or projectable rate by which a rational agent trades off all concerns in all contexts. Even if an agent is able to make a decision between two goods, which appear to hold different values for them (such as choosing work and money over family and friends), this does nothing to prove that the distinct concerns can be generally reduced to a single measure with the aim to maximize anything, and does nothing to explain the motivations figuring in to their choice in different circumstances.[^39] Agents learn how to make decisions by learning how to value things, determining what it is they should be concerned about, and reinterpreting these concerns and the conceptions of when they should apply, by orienting and defining themselves towards distinct aims, commitments and values. They often face tough decisions where the distinct and mutually irreducible claims of two concerns cannot both be satisfied, where their distinct commitments and values may call them in different directions. This is the difficulty, but reality, of practical deliberation and choice, among individuals with unique orientations and distinct normative concerns, who are making decisions and refining and redefining their values and assessing the appropriate action those values call for along the way.[^40]

Every relation embodies different norms for action (and distribution), and distinct ways of valuing the parties to the relation and the goods in question that they must distribute between them; it just happens to be the case that market relations and norms value all goods instrumentally, conceive of all parties as consumers or exchange partners instrumental to each other’s utility, and are dominated by selfish and fiscal reasons for action. Instead of appealing to consumer preferences to decide how to provide and distribute goods, we should rather ask what attitude (preferences for the Rational Choice theorist) we want to promote and what relational models are appropriate to such promotions of value that would achieve an adequate, sustainable and fair provision. This goes beyond efficiency to include questions of relations (of which norms and values form a part) that influence provision and distribution, because these further concerns often capture differences in efficiency as well if not better than preference satisfaction (as in the Gift-Relation of blood case), and capture the failure to value goods appropriately that can lead to market failure and social dilemmas, in such a way that there are steps towards solutions that can be made.

Preferences, inferred from choices, and taken in Rational Choice theory to indicate value, can actually be changed by the context (relationships and social institutions); they are not exogenous and influenced by the agent’s given tastes alone, they are not wholly autonomous. There may be different contexts in which preferences and values are distinctly different, and thereby new possibilities for welfare that weren’t even possible before. In this way it is circular to appeal to the satisfaction of preferences to justify the introduction of a market and the claim that maximizing preference satisfaction will maximize welfare.[^41] Different values are actually promoted by different relations, actors respond to the world by determining what the appropriate way to act would be in the given circumstances, and often this has nothing to do with considerations of money or personal benefit.

[^29]: Kenneth Arrow, “Gifts and Exchanges” in *Philosophy and Public Affairs*, 1972, vol. 1, no. 4

[^30]: Jon Elster, “The Market and the Forum: Three Varieties of Political Activity” in Jon Elster and Aanund Hylland eds., *Foundations of Social Choice Theory*, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986) 115

[^31]: Taylor op.cit., 45

[^32]: David Hume,1739, *A Treatise of Human Nature*, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000) 266

[^33]: Taylor op.cit., 41

[^34]: Ibid., 50

[^35]: George F. Scheuler, *Desire: Its Role in Practical Reason and the Explanation of Action,* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995) 20-2; Jonathan Dancy, *Practical Reality* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000) 80

[^36]: Arrow, “Gifts and Exchanges,” op.cit., 349-51

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: Wiggins, op.cit. 371

[^39]: Wiggins, op.cit., 371

[^40]: Ibid., 373

[^41]: Satz, op.cit. 49



