---
title: ""
style: ""
---

# 5. Rational Action as Based on Good Reasons 

The Rational Choice model conceives of rationality as a means to given ends, which can all be reduced to the actor’s utility. Goods, people and ideals are all conceived of as instrumental to the agent’s utility. But rationality is about more than maximizing a given end; it requires that the ends themselves be valued appropriately and based on good reasons, and action motivated by those reasonable ends in turn. Good reasons for action are themselves determined by rational reflection, and used when a context is rationally conceived as an appropriate one. Reason has taught people when to use self-restraint, which passions or desires are worthy of satisfaction, and which would undermine other values. Reason has taught human beings that empathy should be expanded to other people, people outside of their tribe or seemingly different to them, to women and even to animals. For example by taking basic claims like “it is wrong for you to do that to me”, and formalising it to yield “it is wrong for x to do that to y”, and substituting “me” and “you” for the pronouns, we get a more universal, rather than compartmentalized self-serving, morality. It allows people to leave their parochial vantage point and assess their ideals and norms for action (how they express their ideals) to achieve greater harmony and consistency between them, and in leaving this vantage point, assessing more than their isolated self-interested or tribal concerns. Rationality provides the basis for questioning how things are valued and how those things should be treated accordingly.

Practical reason is not perfect, but in its practicality it is a matter of learning, improving and expanding its realm. With bad ends an a priori instrumental rationality and the contextual consistency it serves can worsen irrationality in practice. The Rational Choice model unreasonably takes all ends as given and not of importance to reflective deliberation.[^42] It takes rationality as conceived independently to morality, context, or agent-centred ideals, as if we were not capable of expanding and improving our use of rationality beyond the Rational Choice model. Of course, instrumental rationality is undoubtedly useful when the rational concerns of a context *can* be reduced to one measure, it *can* help us maximize that value and achieve our ends. But our ends, our distinct values, and the way our actions fit our values (our means fit our ends), are all in practice constantly reflected upon and rightfully so. In this way fuller practical reason both explains human behaviour and guides it to improve.

Rational actors may value many different things in different ways, and it is their task, and the task of philosophy in particular, to reflect upon, assess and critique the different ways in which things are valued, whether they are appropriate to the goods in question, how those things are treated in turn, and whether those evaluations and practical treatments are consistent. Philosophy should participate in the critique of people’s reasons for action, whether valuing things in certain ways is degrading or fetishizing, and whether our social practices and norms for action adequately express and promote appropriate values. The objectivity and justifiability of values and attitudes towards things must be assessed, and in this way distinguished from matters of taste. Anderson provides three types of critical strategies to aid in the assessment of the justifiability of norms expressive of values, Internal Strategies (which include internal coherence testing, narrow reflective equilibrium, and idealistic self-criticism to test integrity)[^43]; Scientific Strategies (by revealing factual concepts which are at odds with empirical knowledge; showing that an ideal is Utopian; revealing viable alternatives to the norm where it was thought necessary; showing a norm has become historically pointless due to changing circumstances; and genealogical criticism which reveals incoherence or self-deception in the genesis of the norm)[^44]; and Experiential Strategies (where novel encounters or being persuaded by the experience of others introduces new considerations and evaluations).[^45] As the web of communication and the realm of critical reason expand and become more accessible to everyone on the earth, we can expect that if parties accept that their values and norms must be justifiable to others (if they attempt to be reasonable), then new opportunities for claiming objectivity and justifiability will enhance the rationality of practical reason, and guide our actions on better reasons.

In deciding what concerns matter to us, we embody more than instrumental concerns for our own “utility”, we act in accordance with our ideals that are constitutive of our identity, our genuine commitments and concerns, and establish coherence in our lives; when we fail to do so we experience shame, we evaluate ourselves and see that we have failed to live up to who we aspired to be.[^46] We recognize that we were motivated or swayed by reasons that we do not endorse as good reasons in those circumstances. We feel like we cannot justify our own actions to ourselves, let alone justify them to others. Being able to justify one’s actions to others is an important part of seeing oneself as having a good reason, or an objectively right norm for action under the circumstances. For example, in a cooperative endeavour if I exploit the kindness of others on selfish considerations, I will likely be unwilling to express that to them, and most unlikely to endorse those reasons for action as objectively right. If it was a competitive situation, where the going norm was to look out for oneself, then it is likely that I will be very willing to tell others that my reasons for action were calculated selfish considerations, and would be alright with them doing so. We aim to live in a way that we can justify to ourselves, and in turn, justify to others; whether they agree with all of our ideals or not, we need to justify ourselves, and make sense of our lives and the actions which form them.

Problems are more than the absence of markets for rational decision makers, and could be due to inappropriately valuing goods, having uncoordinated norms for action that do not fit or express the appropriate value of a good, or an inability to act in accordance with their appropriate valuations because choices are limited by one’s situation. Since social relations embody norms for valuing people and goods, and norms for appropriate action towards people and the distribution of goods between them, social relations are a key to changing attitudes towards use, provision, and the problem in general. Beliefs about the relations we are part of, how *we* are valued, and how we are expected to behave in those relations influence our concerns and motivations for action. We do more than converge upon one of a number of possible equilibria with others, beliefs help guide action by guiding our decision about which concerns matter under the circumstances, and those concerns motivate action directly. It is more than a matter of beliefs about what other people are doing (social norms), predicting other people’s action and allowing us to maximize our own utility with that information; we find ourselves and our values in our relations with others, and hold ourselves up to those standards that are created and justified communally.

[^42]: Wiggins, op.cit., 378 & 385

[^43]: Elizabeth Anderson, *Value in Ethics and Economics*, (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1993) 106-107

[^44]: Ibid., 107-108

[^45]: Ibid. 108-109

[^46]: Taylor, op.cit. 34-37

[^47]: Mark Van Vugt et al., “Perspectives on Cooperation in Modern Society: helping the self, the community, and society” in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 5

[^48]: Mark Snyder & Allen M. Omoto, “Doing Good for Self and Society: volunteerism and the psychology of citizen participation” Ch 7 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 130-40

[^49]: Van Lange et al., “Choosing Between personal Comfort and the Environment” Ch 3 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 51

[^50]: David Sally, “On Sympathy and Games”, in *Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization*, 44, (2000) 22-30

[^51]: Robert B. Cialdini, Raymond R. Reno, Carl A. Kallgren, “A focus theory of normative conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places,” in *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 58 (1990) 1015–1026

[^52]: Axelrod, op.cit., 33-36

[^53]: Johanna Mollerstrom et al., “Social framing effects: Preferences or beliefs?” in *Games and Economic Behavior*, 76 (1), 117–130; as well as in: J. Richard Eiser & Kum-Kum Bhavnani, “The effect of situational meaning on the behaviour of subjects in the prisoner's dilemma game” in *European Journal of Social Psychology*, 4 (1), (1974) 93-97.

[^54]: Evgenia Hristova et al., “Cooperation in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game: Influence of Players’ Social Roles*”* in *Proceedings of Cognitive Science* (2012) 2583

[^55]: Ann E. Tenbrunsel and David M. Messick “Sanctioning systems, Decision Frames, and Cooperation,” in *Administrative Science Quarterly,* 44 no. 4 (December 1999) 698

[^56]: Alan Fiske, "The four elementary forms of sociality: framework for a unified theory of social relations." In *Psychological review* 99, no. 4 (1992) 689

[^57]: Bert Klandermans, “Identity and Protest: how group identification helps to overcome collective action dilemmas” Ch 9 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 170-83

[^58]: Aaron Hatcher et al., “An Economic Analysis of Compliance with Fishery Regulations” Ch 5 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 95

[^59]: Ibid., 98

[^60]: Henk Elffers, “But Taxpayers Do Cooperate!”Ch 10 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 186

[^61]: Tom R. Tyler, “Why Do People Cooperate in Groups? Support for structural solutions to social dilemma problems” Ch 4 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 67 & 77

[^62]: Russell Cropanzo & Zinta S. Byrne, “Workplace Justice and the Dilemma of Organizational Citizenship” Ch 8 in Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 144-156

[^63]: Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman, *In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America’s Best Run Companies* (New York: Harper and Row, 1982); Truman Bewley, *Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999); Richard E. Walton, “From Control to Commitment in the Workplace,” in *Harvard Business Review*, 63 (1985) 77-84; William F. Whyte, *Money and Motivation: An Analysis of Incentives in Industry* (New York, Harper and Row: 1955).

[^64]: Taylor, op.cit., 189-207

[^65]: Ibid.; see also: Edella Schlager cited in footnote 66

[^66]: Van Vugt et al., op.cit., 58-9

[^67]: Taylor, op.cit., 176-178

[^68]: Edella Schlager, “Collective Cooperation in Common Pool Resources” Ch 6 in Mark Van Vugt et al. eds., *Cooperation in Modern Society: Promoting the Welfare of Communities, States and Organizations*, (London: Routledge, 2000) 107-113

[^69]: Titmuss loc.cit, 270-274

[^70]: Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons”, 1245

[^71]: Sandel, loc.cit., 127

[^72]: Arrow, loc.cit, 354-55

[^73]: Titmuss loc.cit., 244

[^74]: Aristotle, *Nichomachean Ethics*, trans. David Ross (New York: Oxford University Press, 1925), Book II, Ch 1, (1103a-1103b); Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract, trans. G.D.H Cole, rev. ed. (New York: Knopf, 1993), Book III, Ch 15, 239-40