---
title: ""
style: ""
---

# 7. The Outcomes of a Reasonable Theory of Rationality

To show that rational actors value things in different ways and deliberate about actions by assessing the reasons for action in the situation, goes some way to describing how to preserve and promote the appropriate value of the goods in question and the relations between the actors. Valuing others as equals in a cooperative endeavour and endorsing a norm of fairness is potentially justifiable to everyone and can therefore be objectively endorsed. Holding one’s actions up to the standards of such an ideal can move one’s actions beyond self-interested motivations. The rational action for an actor will be addressed by determining which reasons count as good motivations for action in the context, and as such social relations which embody and express certain ways of framing the context and valuing and treating things and people are important to understanding how an individual deliberated about what to do. Titmuss said that “The ways in which society organizes and structures its social institutions can encourage or discourage the altruistic in man; such systems can foster integration or alienation”.[^69] He saw that certain relations and ideals (such as performing acts of altruism or civic duty) were not only good for efficiency and overcoming problems, but were valuable for social life and well-being in general. This is in stark contrast from Hardin’s conception of norms as guilt-inducers and in turn, pathologies.[^70] Norms and ideals are not just anxiety-inducing restrictions on our freedom, they define us and place us within our own coherent narrative of our lives and help us navigate the social contexts and problems we encounter, they present new possibilities for action, and call us to ever evaluate our action and our reasons for action as rational beings, our means, as well as our ends.

A harrowing reply to Titmuss’ results in *The Gift Relationship*, coming from Kenneth Arrow, and representing the epitome of economic thought on the matter (Sir Dennis H Robertson and Lawrence Summers have said such things), was that ethical behaviour, like all things of value to economists, needs to be economized.[^71] Not only do economists think that altruism and ethical behaviour need to be economized, they conceive of it like any other good of value, as a commodity already. Arrow avows: “I don’t want to rely too heavily on substituting ethics for self-interest… we do not wish to use up recklessly the scarce resources of altruistic motivation”.[^72] If this conception of ethical behaviour were true, it would doom us to a conception of human beings who are not capable of progression in ethical respects, who are not capable of cultivating regard for others than ourselves, or improving our virtuous action. It would advocate the extension of markets wherever possible, to save our precious ethics. It conceives of ethical behaviour as in fixed supply. But Titmuss never conceived of ethical or civic behaviour like this in his study, he saw it as something cultivated through practice, and worried that commodifying relations that were based on gift-relations would undermine such activity in other spheres of life.[^73] I am inclined to agree with Titmuss; and Aristotle’s conception of virtue as cultivated in practice; and Rousseau’s conception of civic devotion being cultivated by performing civic duty.[^74] Ethical behaviour is no commodity; it is constitutively incompatible with being bought, and in this way incommensurable with money. The things we value are not all commodities, and do not obey the laws of supply and demand or the price effect on demand. Moreover, to assume human beings are constituted in such a way to be fixed in nature with a low supply of virtuous ability, simply begs the economist’s questions about rational choice, and does an insufficient job as an explanation for much of human behaviour in the real world.

Hardin is right to say that social dilemmas have no strictly technical solutions that involve no changes in the way of human morality and values. But there are a number of solutions which do affect the supply and use of human morality and values, and change the framing, actions towards solutions, and outcomes of social problems. Of course, if one thinks that technical solutions, implementing different social relations, or commodifying a good, cannot have any effect on human “preferences” and motivating reasons for action, as Arrow and most economists do, then it is nearly impossible to grasp the way in which restricting solutions to purely market based ones will affect the nature of actors, their deliberations about their choices, and the outcomes of attempts at solutions.

[^69]: Titmuss loc.cit, 270-274

[^70]: Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons”, 1245

[^71]: Sandel, loc.cit., 127

[^72]: Arrow, loc.cit, 354-55

[^73]: Titmuss loc.cit., 244

[^74]: Aristotle, *Nichomachean Ethics*, trans. David Ross (New York: Oxford University Press, 1925), Book II, Ch 1, (1103a-1103b); Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract, trans. G.D.H Cole, rev. ed. (New York: Knopf, 1993), Book III, Ch 15, 239-40
