---
title: ""
style: ""
---


# Conclusion

None of the suggestions from empirical cases offered herein resemble Hardin’s coercion or a Hobbesian Leviathan. Although they influence actors’ reasons for action, those reasons are different in implementation, nature and effect from coercion and a loss of freedom. In fact, many of these suggestions involve an increase in self-determination and common management, rather than a decrease in freedom or a centralization of power. The impact on individuals is not one that figures in to cost-benefit analyses of Rational Choice; it impacts their framing of the situation, identification with the problem, and identity in their social relations, providing reasons for action that motivate them directly, despite potentially conflicting desires for a different action, despite the sacrifices they often have to make. Being valued in a context, being treated fairly by legitimate and effective institutions, being part of a cooperative endeavour, and identifying with the solution (e.g. contributing to a common good, or sacrificing with others) are all important to motivate individuals to act for the social good, and in effect their own well-being is increased: in the long-term the resource is larger and the payoffs are bigger, and in the short-term they are united with each other and aware of their interdependence and individual relevance.

Cooperation is an important factor explaining how human beings’ as social animals have increased their power over their circumstances. Whatever relational model is used as the basis of interaction and cooperation, be it a hierarchical (Authority Ranking) model, a Community Sharing model, an Equality Matching model or a Market model, a level of personal involvement and belief in the system must prevail for the system to be stable, compliance simply cannot be monitored and enforced everywhere without something in the way of values, norms, and ideals; and strategies (such as Tit-for-tat reciprocity) are only stable when enough actors believe in them in the first place. The norms that the relations embody and promote, and the identity of participants within their contexts, are essential to explaining and understanding behaviour. Confronting large-scale problems that have never been faced at such levels before, and with social ideals of autonomy and equality being realized to greater extents, we must interrogate the way in which social institutions are structured to ensure that they foster, rather than undermine, socially desirable behaviour. The goal is more than achieving the best payoffs for players by any means; even though more decentralized and pro-social systems are more effective than hierarchical coercion and control anyway, the types of relations in social systems are valued in themselves. Certain relations and ideals, seen as valuable to social beings’ unity, autonomy, equality, and survival, should be fostered and used wherever possible rather than breaking down social relations and reducing the need to be aware and conscientious of interdependence.

Rational actors are capable of overcoming theoretical dilemmas between their own self-interests and the collective interests. When people identify with and share reasons for action, social problems are encountered as struggles that need to be engaged with and addressed, and are seen as possibilities for collective action to overcome collective challenges. Awareness of the collective interest being in alignment with the long-term self-interest of individuals, perceived efficacy of the collective action and its dependence on individuals, and looking beyond self-interest to the framing and general importance of the problem itself, are extremely important factors to address in confronting any social problem with the theoretical form of a social dilemma. Social problems are more than the absence of markets, and are not outcomes of a supposed innate self-interest in human nature that motivates all action, they are structural problems and as such they require changes to the structural relations contributing to those problems. This involves addressing the relations of social institutions that contribute to self-interested behaviour and crowd out moral and intrinsic values as reasons for action, and addressing a lack of awareness of one’s effects on the problem, the interdependence of the collective, and possibilities for tackling problems collectively. Once we take a purely market based relational model for granted to explain human behaviour, describe failures in the market, and guide our solutions, it is no wonder that the assumptions come to life and are confirmed when those market solutions and norms are imposed everywhere. We cannot overlook the effects of the structural relation itself on norms that influence individual behaviour, and the contribution of structural relations to the problem in the first place. The Rational Choice model is radically incomplete in its description of rational individuals’ behaviour, individuals who value many things in different ways which aren’t commensurable with money, and who deliberate about courses of action which often have nothing to do with analyses of personal costs and benefits, but are rather based on consideration of reasons for action. The theorems for General Equilibrium are radically wrong in supposing that we should commodify and privatize everything of value to human beings to address the incompleteness and inefficiency of markets, and thereby solve all social problems, let alone in supposing that it is even possible to do such a thing!

